doc/launcher/README.md, before:

# Launcher GUI Documentation

The Launcher is a slim top-bar GUI that stays at the top of the screen, providing quick access to all PyPDF Toolbox utilities.

## Features

- **Slim Design**: Minimal screen footprint with a top-bar interface
- **Tool Discovery**: Automatically discovers available tools from `launch_*.bat` / `launch_*.sh` files
- **Window Positioning**: Positions tool windows in the available screen space below the launcher
- **Global Azure AI Configuration**: Centralized configuration for Azure OpenAI and Document Intelligence services

## Screenshots

### Azure AI Configuration

![Azure AI Configuration Dialog](screenshots/azure-config.png)

*Azure AI Configuration dialog - Configure Azure OpenAI and Document Intelligence services globally for all tools*

### Main Launcher Window

![Main Launcher Window](screenshots/01-main-window.png)

*Main launcher bar showing available tools and control buttons*

## Usage

### Starting the Launcher

**Windows:**
```batch
launcher.bat
```

**Linux/macOS:**
```bash
./launcher.sh
```

### Silent Launch (No Console Window)

**Windows:**
- Double-click `PyPDF_Toolbox.pyw`
- Or use `start.bat`

### Launching Tools

Click on any tool button in the launcher bar to open that utility. The tool window will automatically position itself below the launcher.

### Azure AI Configuration

The launcher provides a global Azure AI configuration dialog accessible via the **"⚙️ Azure"** button in the launcher's control panel.

**To configure Azure AI services:**

1. Click the **"⚙️ Azure"** button in the launcher
2. Enter your Azure credentials:
   - **Azure OpenAI**: Endpoint, API key, deployment name, and API version
   - **Azure Document Intelligence**: Endpoint and API key
3. Click **"Test Connection"** to verify your settings
4. Click **"Save"** to store the configuration

**Configuration is shared across all tools** - once configured in the launcher, all PDF tools that use Azure AI will automatically use these settings.

**Alternative Configuration Methods:**

- **Environment Variables**: Set `AZURE_OPENAI_ENDPOINT`, `AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY`, `AZURE_DOC_INTEL_ENDPOINT`, `AZURE_DOC_INTEL_API_KEY`
- **Config File**: Edit `config/azure_ai.yaml` directly (see `config/azure_ai.yaml.template` for format)

See the screenshot above for the configuration dialog interface.

## Technical Details

- **Source File**: `src/launcher_gui.py`
- **Framework**: tkinter with ttk widgets
- **Position**: Top of screen (fullwidth or centered)

## Environment Variables

The launcher sets these environment variables for child tools:

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `TOOL_WINDOW_X` | X position for tool window |
| `TOOL_WINDOW_Y` | Y position for tool window |
| `TOOL_WINDOW_WIDTH` | Available width for tool window |
| `TOOL_WINDOW_HEIGHT` | Available height for tool window |

Commit message:

feat: Add advanced PDF Visual Combiner and improve launcher UX
- Add advanced PDF Visual Combiner tool with visual page selection
  - Import from util_pdf_combiner_ex_gui.py with thumbnail-based selection
  - Support multiple PDF files with page-by-page visual selection
  - Add configurable thumbnail sizes (small to giant)
  - Implement auto-selection patterns (alternate, alternate+reverse)
  - Add drag and drop support with tkinterdnd2
  - Use PyMuPDF for high-quality thumbnail rendering
  - Adapt UI to match project's modern styling (UIColors, UIFonts, UISpacing)

- Rename tool launch scripts for better organization
  - Rename launch_manual_splitter to launch_pdf_splitter
  - Rename launch_pdf_combiner to launch_pdf_visual_combiner
  - Rename launch_text_extractor to launch_pdf_text_extractor
  - Update shell script comments to match new names
  - Add "combine" keyword to launcher icon mapping

- Add tool categorization with visual separators in launcher
  - Implement category detection (split_merge, extract_analyze, etc.)
  - Add category labels (Split & Merge, Extract & Analyze, etc.)
  - Add vertical separators between tool categories
  - Sort tools by category then alphabetically within category

- Fix launcher exit to properly terminate subprocesses
  - Add _kill_process_tree_windows() method using taskkill /T flag
  - Kill entire process trees on Windows (parent + children)
  - Improve close_all_tools() with multiple termination attempts
  - Add double-check logic in on_close() to ensure all processes killed
  - Add proper wait times between termination attempts
  - Handle ProcessLookupError and ValueError exceptions gracefully

- Adjust tool window positioning and spacing
  - Reduce gap between launcher and tool windows (50px -> 10px -> 40px)
  - Adjust tool window height calculation to account for gap
  - Update bottom margin calc

doc/launcher/README.md, after:

# Launcher GUI Documentation

The Launcher is a slim top-bar GUI that stays at the top of the screen, providing quick access to all PyPDF Toolbox utilities.

## Features

- **Slim Design**: Minimal screen footprint with a top-bar interface
- **Tool Discovery**: Automatically discovers available tools from `launch_pdf_*.bat` / `launch_pdf_*.sh` files
- **Tool Categorization**: Tools are automatically organized into categories (Split & Merge, Extract & Analyze, etc.) with visual separators
- **Window Positioning**: Positions tool windows in the available screen space below the launcher
- **Global Azure AI Configuration**: Centralized configuration for Azure OpenAI and Document Intelligence services
- **Process Management**: Properly terminates all tool subprocesses when exiting

## Screenshots

### Azure AI Configuration

![Azure AI Configuration Dialog](screenshots/azure-config.png)

*Azure AI Configuration dialog - Configure Azure OpenAI and Document Intelligence services globally for all tools*

### Main Launcher Window

![Main Launcher Window](screenshots/01-main-window.png)

*Main launcher bar showing available tools and control buttons*

## Usage

### Starting the Launcher

**Windows:**
```batch
launcher.bat
```

**Linux/macOS:**
```bash
./launcher.sh
```

### Silent Launch (No Console Window)

**Windows:**
- Double-click `PyPDF_Toolbox.pyw`
- Or use `start.bat`

### Launching Tools

Click on any tool button in the launcher bar to open that utility. The tool window will automatically position itself below the launcher.

**Tool Categories:**
- Tools are automatically organized into categories:
  - **Split & Merge**: Tools for splitting and combining PDFs
  - **Extract & Analyze**: Tools for extracting content from PDFs
  - **Convert & Transform**: Tools for converting and transforming PDFs
  - **Optimize**: Tools for compressing and optimizing PDFs
  - **Security**: Tools for encrypting/decrypting PDFs
  - **Annotate**: Tools for adding watermarks and annotations
- Visual separators appear between categories for easy navigation

### Azure AI Configuration

The launcher provides a global Azure AI configuration dialog accessible via the **"⚙️ Azure"** button in the launcher's control panel.

**To configure Azure AI services:**

1. Click the **"⚙️ Azure"** button in the launcher
2. Enter your Azure credentials:
   - **Azure OpenAI**: Endpoint, API key, deployment name, and API version
   - **Azure Document Intelligence**: Endpoint and API key
3. Click **"Test Connection"** to verify your settings
4. Click **"Save"** to store the configuration

**Configuration is shared across all tools** - once configured in the launcher, all PDF tools that use Azure AI will automatically use these settings.

**Alternative Configuration Methods:**

- **Environment Variables**: Set `AZURE_OPENAI_ENDPOINT`, `AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY`, `AZURE_DOC_INTEL_ENDPOINT`, `AZURE_DOC_INTEL_API_KEY`
- **Config File**: Edit `config/azure_ai.yaml` directly (see `config/azure_ai.yaml.template` for format)

See the screenshot above for the configuration dialog interface.

## Technical Details

- **Source File**: `src/launcher_gui.py`
- **Framework**: tkinter with ttk widgets
- **Position**: Top of screen (fullwidth or centered)

## Environment Variables

The launcher sets these environment variables for child tools:

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `TOOL_WINDOW_X` | X position for tool window |
| `TOOL_WINDOW_Y` | Y position for tool window |
| `TOOL_WINDOW_WIDTH` | Available width for tool window |
| `TOOL_WINDOW_HEIGHT` | Available height for tool window |
